+++
date = '2025-12-23T22:54:50-05:00'
draft = false
title = 'On slowness, and how we assign value'
url = "blog/drafts/:slug"
+++

On the Friday before Christmas, 2025, I searched for meaning.

I opened the Merriam Webster app on my phone and typed in "world weary" and started looking in the synonyms, attempting to find a word that accurately described my inner experience, the exhaustion I felt that wasn't craving sleep or rest, but yearning after a break from my entire existence, of the experience of being chronically fatigued since the spring, of my brain and body slowing, despite my young age of 27. I scrolled through the thesaurus, and my eyes landed on an unfamiliar word, "enervated." The meaning was somewhat generic, "*lacking physical, mental, or moral vigor*," but in the examples I found something that felt much more apt:

> a lifetime of working in dreary jobs had *enervated his very soul*

A little over a year before, I had just started my final year in school. I had finished my Bachelor's in Computer Science the prior spring, and was picking up my masters, of which I'd already taken one third. The masters focused on Cybersecurity, and though my mental health waxed and waned through the fall semester and the first half of the spring, I had some idea of my future. I was going to apply to jobs in cybersecurity, doing my best to stick to some semblance of morality while I entered into a field populated by companies such as Raytheon, or even working directly for the DOD. I choreographed a few contra dances, constructed a couple cryptic crosswords, and generally was treading water and didn't feel like I'd drown anytime soon.

At this point, in Spring 2025, I had managed to avoid catching covid-19, but that streak finally ended in late March. I remember how tired I felt, how I remarked that when I folded my laundry on my bed I had to take a break because it was too much work. Besides the fatigue my experience was pretty mild, like a cold with a lot more fatigue and some lung issues. I got prescribed a steroid for my lungs once I started testing negative, and that brought me, if not all the way to my baseline, to some semblance of normalcy. I was able to dance with lots of rests, and generally continued on with my life – though I did have to drop a particularly difficult and uninteresting class in favor of filling the requirement in the Summer.

Enervated is one of those odd words where you think it might mean energized, but in reality it's the result of losing that very energy.

Starting one month later I developed long covid, starting with exercise intolerance, chronic fatigue, tremors, and in the evenings, brain fog. Over the course of the next several months the brain fog worsened. I managed to finish my masters, and had been doing a lot with my brain – I was learning memory techniques and creating mind palaces to store scrabble words, as well as general memory training with such things as memorizing the order of a deck of cards. I was playing scrabble regularly, often two or three games in a row. I constructed and published a cryptic crossword as part of a trans charity puzzle pack. I was reading and applying to jobs and generally things felt, if not comfortable, at least stable. Then the brain fog worsened. A lot. I found that I couldn't read as much without a headache, or play as much scrabble, or do practically anything that required the logical parts of my brain. Pushing this would only result in increased symptoms – headache, fatigue, light sensitivity, tremors. I stopped applying to jobs as if I can't read three pages of a book I'm interested in, how am I supposed to do involved cybersecurity work?

What I would like to discuss today is not my illness, but about the value of a human life, and the ways we arbitrarily diminish it. You see, as my brain fog has worsened, the way I interact with the world and the people in it has changed, and slowed. Sometimes I'll take almost a minute to respond to something simple, and being able to do simple mental math is often out of reach. As a society we put quick wit and deductive reasoning on a pedestal. We're told we're "smart" when we do something others approve of, and "stupid" otherwise. The english language has a lot of words for stupid: ignorant, brainless, mindless, foolish, slow-witted, witless, slow, moronic, idiotic, crazy, lamebrained, brain-dead... We value intelligence, and look down on all those that seem to lack it.

Since the past few months, I could accurately be called "slow" a decent portion of the time, and as that's sunk in, I've reflected on things I've said and thought, as well as heard. Things like "I can't stand incompetent people," "that's idiotic," "stop being stupid..." and those phrases begin to hurt, understanding what it would be like to hear them. Why do we diminish the value of people that are slow? Slowness shouldn't be looked down on, as much as being unhealthy shouldn't be looked down on. In fact I think there's only one thing that one can do that should be looked down on: **purposefully, with full intention and mental clarity, producing harm to yourself and/or those around you**. (I actually don't think it's possible to do this; more later). There is, though, a lesser form of this that I think is important to mention, which is **the complete avoidance of learning about others issues, and how you might be doing harm**.

So while this post may have gone in the direction of "there are many types of intelligence and we place one type on a pedestal and ignore the rest" (which is, I think, objectively true). I want to present a person to you. This person is unintelligent in every way you can imagine, they have poor reasoning and pattern recognition, slow to learn. They have poor emotional intelligence, having difficulty understanding others emotions and conveying their own. They aren't good in social situations, coming off as abrasive. And they don't have they capacity to understand right from wrong. And, if you will allow this bit of imagination, they are your daughter, or father, or otherwise close familial tie. Pick whatever relation allows you to have the most emotional bond with this human. Picture this person, give them some physical characteristics of your choice, maybe a name, really try to connect with them.

This person, this close family member or friend, are they a bad person? or does their mind and body just function a bit differently? Sure, with the person we've created, maybe they'll be harmful to themselves and those around them, but is it their *fault?*, or is it it just what they were born with. They shouldn't be hated for being created the way that they were – all that should arise from this is possibly structures that limit the harm they can do. Perhaps a caretaker, someone able to view this person kindly and as a full person. Yes, if they are threatening in some way, or cause harm, that's bad, and sometimes bad things need to be punished in some way. But in terms of the value of a human life, the value of a life, are they really lesser?

I said earlier that I'm unsure it's possible for a person to **"purposefully, with full intention and mental clarity, conduct harm on themselves and others."** This is because our primary drives are thus: to feel safe, and feel like our loved ones our save, to continue being alive, and to pass on our genes. None of these desires is problematic, but all of them can cloud our view and create conditions for harmful actions. Take the first evil person that comes to mind, and think about what their drives may be – is it for power? well, power might make you feel safe, is it to get rid of outsiders? safety. I believe every action can be thought of in these terms. And thus being clouded by such a drive, we cannot say that someone who conducts this harm unto others is acting with full mental clarity – they're certainly not seeing the whole picture. We need intelligent people of all sorts in our society – emotionally intelligent, logically intelligent, morally intelligent. They can build structures and programs and create good, whether at a hyper-local scale or a broader one. But not possessing these facets of intelligence does not necessitate the concept of "badness."

Zen Master Shunryu Suzuki has a famous quote:

> "There are, strictly speaking, no enlightened people, there is only enlightened activity."

I would posit the same is true for badness. There are no bad people, only bad behavior.
